- [Instructor] Let's take a closer look
at sorting collections by walking through a few examples
that use a natural sort order.
We'll start by giving our room class a natural order.
The order will sort the rooms in alphabetical order first
by their name, and then by their type.
To specify a natural order,
a type must implement the comparable interface.
So let's go ahead and honor room class.
We'll implement the interface.
The interface accepts a generic type argument.
In this case, I'm going to specify that as room,
this will allow an instance of a room to be compared
against another instance of a room.
Now you'll notice the compiler immediately complaints,
and that's because we haven't satisfied
the comparable interface.
So just hover over the room class
and then click on add unimplemented methods.
And then you'll notice that within your room class,
you'll get a CompareTo method.
Now here we'll need to provide the logic
that performs the comparison between the two rooms.
So to start out,
I'm going to declare a new integer named result.
Our result variable will be assigned the return value
of comparing the names of the rooms.
So I'm going to get the name of the current room,
and then I'm going to invoke it's CompareTo method,
which accepts another string.
So here you can see
I'm leveraging the comparable implementation
of the string object.
I'm delegating the comparison to another type.
Now here, we just need to provide the name
of the other room that we're comparing against.
This is going to result in an integer
that's either negative, positive, or zero.
Now, if it's anything besides zero,
it means the comparison was resolved with our primary sort.
So in that case,
we can check to see if the result is not equal to zero,
and then we can just return the result
in this ternary expression.
Now, if the result is zero,
we can resolve the conflict using a secondary sort.
So to do that, we're going to do something similar
by getting the type of the room,
and then we're going to invoke it's CompareTo method,
and then we're going to pass in the type of the other room
and this should break the tie.
Okay, so we have our CompareTo implementation.
Now let's head over to our application class.
In this class, I've created a list of rooms
and in the list are five rooms.
Now one thing I'll point out is that two of the rooms
have the same name, but different types.
So here you see Oxford as a guest room
and Oxford as a suite.
Now let's first start out by just executing this code
and you can see that the rooms are placed
in their insertion order.
Now let's go ahead and change that by sorting them
using their natural order.
To do this, we can use the collections class provided
by the collections framework.
Now don't get this confused
with the actual collection interface.
It's different.
It provides static methods that we can use to work
with a collection like a list.
So I'm going to go ahead and invoke the sort method
and pass in our list of rooms.
Now watch what happens.
You'll notice that the rooms are placed
in alphabetical order.
And then when we have a room that has the same name,
we order by the type.
So that's our natural sort order in action.
Now there is an overloaded form of this method.
So let's take a look at that.
The overloaded form accepts our list and then a comparitor.
So I can go ahead and pass in our rooms.
And then I can use a comparitor
that specifies the natural order.
And you'll see that we get the same result.
Now in more recent versions of Java,
a sort method was added to the list.
So we can do something like this.
We can invoke the sort method on our room's list,
and then we no longer need to pass in the collection.
All we need to provide is a comparitor.
And when we do this,
we'll get the same results as last time.
This is the preferred method for sorting a list
since it's been introduced.
When specifying the order of elements,
be sure to leverage the language features
that are provided to you.
Using the existing comparable implementations
and the comparitor static methods
will help you write higher quality code
that avoids logic errors that can be introduced
by custom comparison logic.